+++
title = "Regional Report 2000-2001 Canada"
draft = "false"
date = "2001-05-12"
author = "Wendy Watkins"
+++

**IASSIST Regional Report 2000-2001
Canada**

Wendy Watkins<br>
Carleton University<br>
Ottawa, Ontario

The first year of the new millennium marked several exciting events in
Canada.  This report will focus on those which are of national
interest, rather than on individual efforts, although the hard
work of many individuals went into each of these accomplishments and
projects.

## 2001 Census

The 2001 Canadian Census of Population and Agriculture will take place
on May 15, during the IASSIST meetings. This census will see the
addition of same-sex couples to the marital-status choices but will
otherwise be similar to 1996.  The 2006 census planning team is
already in place in order that an Internet-enabled census can be
offered to Canadians. 

## Data Liberation Initiative (DLI)

After a very successful five-year pilot, the DLI is now a permanent
partnership between Statistics Canada and sixty-six Canadian
universities.  During the five years, it has grown in both scope and
maturity.  Recently, it has acquired a new manager, Mike Sivyer, and
has moved from its location in the Dissemination Division to the
Library and Information Centre of Statistics Canada.   Ernie Boyko
retains senior management responsibility for the project, and an
External Advisory Committee, co-chaired by Chuck Humphrey and Wendy
Watkins, provides broad oversight.  

Because we began this enterprise with such a small base of existing
data services (nine, across the country), training has always been a
major focus of the DLI.  A national/regional training plan has been in
place since 1997 and is in the process of being revamped, taking into
account both the desire to meet nationally from time to time, as well
as the need to cater to regional differences in both language and
focus. 

This is truly a success story, and we would like to thank our IASSIST
colleagues for their encouragement and support over the years. 

## CAPDU

Born at the 1988 IASSIST meetings in Washington, CAPDU has grown into
a mature organization.  We have just held a successful 2001 annual
meeting in conjunction with the Ontario and Quebec DLI training
sessions in Montreal.  We lobby for access to public data, the
creation of a National Data Archive and standards for documentation
among other pursuits.  Laine Ruus is the current president of the
organization.  Other IASSIST members continue to play leading roles in
the organization.

## Research Data Centres (RDCs)</b>

This project is a direct spin-off from the DLI.  Once the data were
made available, both Statistics Canada (STC) and the Social Sciences
and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC) became aware that more had to
be done to encourage the use of the files.  They formed the Canadian
Institute for Social Statistics (CISS).  Although the focus is narrow,
covering only Statistics Canada data, they have an ambitious program.
Part of this involves setting up RDCs in several locations across the
country.  These are secure sites, located at Canadian universities and
patterned after their United States' counterparts.  Unlike the US,
however, our RDCs,  will not have enterprise data.  Rather, they will
concentrate on a bevy of new, longitudinal files. Researchers must
write a peer-reviewed proposal which will be vetted by STC and SSHRC
as well as pass a security check.  If successful, they will become
deemed Statistics Canada employees and given access to the data.  By
September of this year, a number of RDCs will have opened.  Staff have
been identified and the infrastructure is being refined.  Activities
at the one open centre are brisk; a number of projectx are being
undertaken, including some work was formerly carried out in STC
regional offices. It would appear that interest in RDC services will
be high.   The relationship between the RDC's and DLI will start to be
defined over the next year. 

## National Data Archive (NDA) Consultation

After the 1999 SSHRC-OECD Social Sciences Infrastructure Conference,
the lack of a Canadian National Data Archive was seen as a barrier to
international activities.  A joint SSHRC-National Archive group was
struck to determine whether it was feasible to go ahead with a study
to assess the need, model and scope of such and institution.  A
working group was appointed and a resource group named to help them in
their deliberations.  Two past IASSIST presidents (Chuck Humphrey and
Sue Bryant) are part of this working group.  Their work was divided
into two phases.  Phase 1 assessed the need while Phase 2, should the
project continue, will propose a model and scope. The results of Phase
1 a recommendation to continue to Phase 2 will be presented to the SSHRC
Board on June 8 of this year.

## Geode

A landmark agreement between AtLIS and the University of Calgary will
see a wealth of Alberta geo-spatial data made available to Alberta
post-secondary institutions for teaching and research purposes.  This
is the first agreement of its kind in Canada and will serve as a model
for others to follow.

## Health Canada and Nesstar

Bill Bradley's unit at Health Canada has undertaken the redevelopment
of its DDMS and DIAS softwares for creating codebooks and browseable
data.  The new system will be built by a group consisting of an Ottawa
based software development firm and the NESSTAR group from Essex and
Norway. 

## Privacy Issues

Privacy legislation is becoming a major concern to the Canadian
research community.  Legislation currently before the House would
forbid the use of data for purposes not originally intended.  While
its design is to preclude the selling of private information, its
outcome could be to severely limit secondary analyses of data from
sources such as Statistics Canada, polling companies and the like.
Canadian researchers are currently studying the European model to see
if it offers any suitable alternatives to that which has been
proposed. 